# Portfolio
im gonna be honest i dont think im gonna find the motivation to make this look good until it's for a grade, though I do appreciate the resources you provided!

## Week 5 post- The Social Determinants of Health and the Capabilities Approach
To my understanding, the social determinants of health comprise all the human-caused factors of a person's current and future health... which is to say essentially everything except genetic factors. Perhaps in the past the natural, non-man-made environment around a person would have been excluded from he determinants, but in the present times with massive climate manipulation it certainly has to be included. To be a bit more precise here, the social determinants of health generally seem to refer to the conditions surrounding a person as they go about their life as well as thew person's access to material (like food) and non-material (like power) resources. Maybe I'm misunderstanding something, but frankly I don't really see the utility in the existence of this term. It's far too all-encompassing to actually be useful in a discussion, apart from one where people are trying to express the many issues with eugenics.

The capabilities approach seems like a thing that's much too complex to sufficiently define or describe in few words, but my best attempt is as follows: The capabilities approach is a framework for how society as a whole should operate to best serve its people. It specifically argues that the goal of a just society should be to provide the freedoms (and resources required) for a person to lead whatever kind of life they desire. This framework places heavy emphasis on 'the ends' rather than 'the means', meaning it is extremely subjective per person and that it is not sufficient to merely measure outcomes by proxies like wealth or health. An ideal implementation of the capabilities approach would have a person always in control of what direction their life takes; never would their options be limited by things like class, health, identity, or circumstance.

Every respectable framework for public health and health policy must revolve around the social determinants of health, as they are the factors within humanity's power to influence. Breaking down the social determinants of health into subcategories like economic status, built environment, and healthcare access allow researchers and policy-makers to analyze what aspects need to be improved in order for general health outcomes to improve. With these determinants in mind, the capabilities approach's position on health policy remains consistent with its overall mission: to ensure everybody has the capability to be healthy. This is a much less grounded approach to health policy than the Rawlsian or social justice approaches, which put more emphasis on the distribution of resources. It seems to me like the capabilities approach would be more focused on those of lower class and socioeconomic position, providing extra care to ensure that they have the same capability to be healthy as those who are more privileged.

## Week 2 post- Ethics in modeling
In my mind, the only completely ethical way to perform data modeling is to require informed consent from each subject involved, use their data only for the purposes they've consented to, and ensure the data cannot be used for other purposes after the conclusion of the modeling. Consent is key. I'd argue that anything less than this isn't just ethically ambiguous, it's downright unethical---even if the modeling is ultimately entirely inconsequential. Ethics are based on principles, which exist in a binary state of being violated or not. There can certainly be degrees of how unethical an action is, and results can differ based on the lens of ethics employed, but I balk at the notion that there exists some manner of unknowable gray area.

The concept of ethical ambiguity for data scientists comes from, I think, the fact that any worthwhile model requires massive amounts of data, and at that level it's too difficult to get enough people to provide informed consent when so much data is free for the taking. But without this consent, every potential negative consequence---from misrepresentation of subjects, to misinterpretation of data, to unfair impact---falls back on the researcher. Something does not become ethically ambiguous if negative consequence fail to manifest; it's the very violation of ethical principles---that potential exposure of unwitting subjects to harm---that makes a practice unethical.

As I've expressed throughout this article, informed consent is a necessity for assuaging ethical challenges---but what exactly do I mean? I mean a terms of service that's required to be accepted to use a service does not count, and a consent form simply explaining the researcher's *intended* goal does not count. To have informed consent, the subject must be fully aware of all the potential risks and consequences, even those outside the researcher's control, and still agree for you to use their data.

But if a researcher were to delve into the unethical, there are ways to mitigate potential harm. If modelling is occurring without the participants' informed consent, it is imperative to perform impact assessment; this invites the potential for harm through the researcher's subjectivity, but could give the researcher a good idea of how stakeholders could be harmed and ways to avoid or mitigate that. Data auditing is also essential. This helps to ensure that your results are not misleading or inauthentic.


## Introductory post- 
Learning data science in social and interdisciplinary contexts matters because without those contexts data scientists only see numbers; not the lives behind them. It's far too easy and far too common for people working with large datasets to turn it into a numbers game---even more so in a corporate setting. Unwise data scientists find themselves prioritizing efficiency and optimization, totally disconnected from the implications of their work. All this is to say that non-technical education for data scientists is essential to ensuring that they stay humane.

I'm yet to know what this course really intends to delve into, so it's hard to have a realistic expectation of how I hope to be changed by it. One concrete thing is building up my skills with Python, statistics, and general data display and analysis. Beyond that I hope to be able to dive into a subject that I'm passionate about throughout this portfolio, so that I can learn more myself and create a resource for others to learn off of. But I think, deep down, the main thing I wish to take away from this course is a renewed hope in data science itself; this isn't to say that I find the discipline lacking in merit, no. Rather, so much of the data science education I've received thus far, regardless of the efforts to incorporate social and interdisciplinary contexts, has felt steeped in blind corporatism. That is not what I want my future to be. I know data science can have applications beyond finding ways for companies to extract more wealth out of consumers, but so far that aspect of data science has held such a spotlight. I don't just want the social contexts to serve as just a guide, those are where I thrive. Data science can be used for good, and I hope this course allows me to explore that.

## Space for other projects?
I'll probably figure out how to move those to separate clickable sections once I know what they actually entail. This space can serve as that in the interim.



### About the author
Dylan Chun (he/him) is a third year student majoring in sociology and data science, with a minor in mathematics. He is passionate about social justice and LGBTQ+ rights, and hopes to hold a career where he can meaningfully help.
